

The value of a saxophone

We are discussing the value of a saxophone to a saxophone player, 
which may differ from the value to collectors or merchants.


Playability

To a player, the principal quality of a saxophone is whether it plays or not.

To say that a horn "plays" means that you can sound every note without extrordinary effort, it is workably in tune, and the ergonomics are manageable.

To a player, the value of a horn that does not play is $0.  

Whereas, the value of a horn that plays well is worth a minimum of around $500 alto/soprano, $750 tenor, or $1500 bari.

If you already have an instrument that can be brought into good playing condition for less than this amount, it is reasonable to invest in repairing your horn.  

Any horn you can verify as being playable, either by playing it yourself or having solid evidence of someone else playing it, is going to be worth at least this much.  Note that a horn being new doesn't mean it is playable--it may need small adjustments from the factory.

Since saxophones regularly sell for more than this amount, the value beyond this essential function include qualities like tone, response, ergonomics, setup, brand/collectability, appearance, and sentimentality.

Many of these qualities are difficult or impossible to verify for a particular saxophone if it does not play, in which case you have to rely on reputation or playing horns of the same or similar brand/model/vintage.



Consistency



Build Quality and Overhauls

Every saxophone's condition is in a constant state of decline, and all saxophones will need repairs from normal usage.  

From the staring point of a new or fully-overhauled instrument, you can expect a well-maintained professional instrument to last 20 years without major issues.

Even the most well-built instruments have parts that wear out over time, including pads, resonators, corks, felts, springs, steels and screws.  In addition, instruments can incur lots of small amounts of damage from dents to bent keys that can go unaddressed for years which might be hindering the tone, intonation or adding key friction.

Professional level instruments are distinguished from student instruments primarily in the build qualiy.  

This means the part tolerances are tighter, so the mechanisms are more accurate and easier to operate.  The materials are less resistant to bending, so they stay adjusted longer.  

They are often designed with additional mechanisms to make it easy to fine-tune key heights, spring tensions, and coordinate mechanical connections.  

So, on professional horns it will also be possible to more accurately set up the instrument to the player's specification, and it will stay that way longer in between repairs, and the cost of equivalent repairs will be less.

This also helps the resale value, since it means that once the horn has been overhaluled, it should retain that part of its value.  

A full overhaul costs around $1200-$2000, which is why the majority of the difference in prices between instruments of the same model/brand/vintage is about the same price as an overhaul.

However, if instruments are are exposed to moisture, mildew, or extreme temperature changes, it is easy for the pads of the instrument to deteriorate and become unplayable.


Tone

Tone is perhaps the most important aspect of a saxophone, since that is what everyone hears.  

However, tone is a subjective factor, as there is a wide range of what is considered desirable from person to person, and among musical genres.  

We generally describe tone in terms of a spectrum of "bright" to "dark".  With more dimensionality, we can also describe tone as "focused" versus "spread".

But, tone is not really a part of the saxophone, it is what emerges when you play it.  

In fact, the player is the most important aspect in tone production, followed by the mouthpiece, and then the saxophone.  

However, for a particular player playing a particular mouthpiece, different saxophones will yeild different results, and this difference in tone is usually what our instinctive attraction or indifference to an instrument is based on.

If the tone of an instrument is not quite what you are looking for, but all other aspects of the instrument are desirable, you might be able to modify the tone by using a differently designed mouthpiece.  

In comparing the tone of horns, it should be noted that most contemporary instruments are based on designs of classic horns, so even the cheapest new modern horn is likely to be able to sound amazing.  This is not true of vintage horns, where 



Projection

Projection is related to how focused the tone is.  

Not so much about how much volume can be produced, but what the instrument sounds like across a room, and in the context of other instruments.  

Some instruments tend to stand out, whereas others tend to blend.

Projection is perhaps the quality most tied to the design of the instrument, meaning the projection will be similar for all saxophones of the same brand/model/vintage.

This can be difficult to guage when auditioning a saxophone in a room by yourself, but although it can be hard to validate, differences in projection are real.

If you read up on peoples' opinions of various vintage saxophone tone and projection, you will see that some brands/models/vintages are reknowned for projection, and this adds to their value.


Response 

Response is something that is tangible only to the player.  However, it is probably the second most important aspect to the player next to tone. 

Response can be thought of as the horn's efficiency, or how much sound you get out compared the amount of energy you put in.

Response includes the relationship between how much air you need to push to get a particular volume, as well as how quickly the tone is manifested.  

It is generally considered better to be able to prouduce a wide range of volumes easily, and manifest the sound quickly.   

The best way to guage response in to try to play softly in the lowest register.

When comparing horns in top condition, differences in response will be innate to the instrument.

However, for used instruments, most of the response is tied to the condition of the instrument, since eroded response is usually the result of leaky pads.  

So, if you are trying a used horn in need of adjustments, you can expect that there will be room for improvement in reponse post-adjustment.


Ergonomics 

Ergonomics refers to how easy is it to manipulate the keys of the instrument, and how comfortable it is to hold and play.

As you begin to play faster, the difficulty in transitioning from note to note becomes more of a factor.  

On different instruments, it will take different amounts of effort to play the same passage.  

This differene in effort required affects the scope and accuracy of what you can learn to execute, the level of comfort, and even the duration you can play.

Likewise, as you play the instrument for longer durations, the comfort becomes a factor.

This is largely a factor of vintage horns, many of which sound great, but are difficult to play, whereas most contemporary horns, no matter how cheaply made, are based on well-designed patterns.

Most of the ergonomic challenges are in the location, placement, and height of the keys for the thumbs, pinkys and palms:  theright hand thumb hook, the left hand octave key and thumbrest, the left hand D/Eb/F palm keys and right hand Bb/C/E side keys, the left pinky Bb/B/C#/G# table, and the right pinky Eb/C keys, and to a lesser extent the front F key, and the location of the neckstrap ring.

To some extent, instruments can be modified by adding buildups to the palm keys, side keys, and pinky keys, by resoldering the neckstrap ring or thumb hook or replacing it with an adjustable thumb hook, or changing the angle of the right hand pinky keys.  

But, making modifications costs time and/or money, and there is a limit to how much an existing keywork setup can be improved with modifications.

The other main aspect of ergonomics involves key tension.  






Consistency 

As we have mentioned, these qualities of tone, reponse, volume, and projection, are somewhat subjective, insofar as different people will prefer different sound concepts.

However, what is objective is how the instrument performs from register to register.

In general, it is better for an instrument to produce similar tone, volume, response and projection in all registers.

In particular, the different registers include bell tones (Bb1-C#1), lower register (D1-C#2), middle register (D2-G#2), upper stack (A2-C#3), palm keys (D3-F3), and altissimo (F#3-D4) 

The six most important notes to check, to allow comparison of are the 3 C#s and the 3 Ds.  This is one note per register, but also allows us to compare octaves, which are easire to compare for intonation as well. 





Intonation

Similar to tone, the largest factor in the quality of intonation is the technique of the player.

However, for a given player, different instruent setups will have different intonation tendencies, and these will either help or hinder the player to play more in tune.

What is complicated about intonation tendenies is that they are not a property of the saxophone itself, but the result of the relationship between the saxophone and the mouthpiece.

Which is to say, there is no such thing as "this saxophone plays in tune" since any saxophone will have different intonation tendencies with different mouthpieces.  

The best you can say is "this saxophone plays in tune with this mouthpiece for me".

If you already have a favorite mouthpiece, then it is reasonable to start with that.  However, you should not in general pick a saxophone based on a mouthpiece.  If you really like every other aspect of an instrument and intonation is the only issue, it is worth trying a different mouthpiece on it to compensate for both intonation and tone.


Ergonomics 



Value of the Horn vs Accessories

A saxophone setup requires several essential accessories including a a well-fitting case ($100-$250), a mouthpiece ($25-$200), ligature & cap ($15-75), and neckstrap ($10-$50), so somewhere in the $100-500 range.  

This works in both directions:  an instrument package without usable accessories will cost you more than the selling price because you will have to buy them, whereas the package might come with valuable accessories you can resell, if you already have a set you like.

So, when comparing the difference between two instrument packages, the value could double this amount, meaning two horn packages with equivalent horns could be, to you, worth a difference of a few hundred dollars.

More seasoned sellers will know if the mouthpices and ligatures with a horn are worthwhile to sell individually, whereas many people assume everything in the case is part of the saxohpone and will sell it as a package.   

This is mostly useful in terms of budgeting, since it almost never a good idea to decide on a saxophone based on the accessories. 



More on Cases

The well-fitting case is especially important since a poor case can cause damage to saxophones.  Sometimes original cases are great in terms of fit but cannot be used because they are moldy or otherwise physically compromised.  

More on Mouthpieces

For a beginner, if the instrument comes with a mouthpiece, you can probably start by using that mouthpiece.  However, for a more advanced player, you may either already have a mouthpiece you prefer, or will need to find one that suits the new instrument.

Neckstraps

Many instrument packages for both new and used or used horns come with a neckstrap, but it may not be very comfortable or secure, so you may want to obtain a better one.

If you are getting a second saxophone, I recommend having these accessories for each instrument.  Do not use the same neckstrap for multiple horns, or you will one day arrive at a gig without a neckstrap because you accidentally left it in the other horn's case.

The main point of this is that the effective cost/value of two comprable instrument packages may differ by $100-$400 depending on the accessories and how useful they are to you.


Budget 





Being essential to sound production, reeds are part of the operating budget for saxophone ($100).  

Reeds are not generally considered part of a saxophone package (although many new instrument packages especially for beginners will often include a reed or two) and you will need quite a few more reeds   

I suggest trying a few different types to determine the best cut and strength.  Variation in cane means that you will likely need to try 2-3 reeds of any one brand/cut/strength in order to have a clear understanding of the variation.   It is important to rotate use of reeds so that you do not overplay any single reed.  So, I would suggest 10 reeds for selection, and 10 more of the kind you select.

There are a few ($100) of accessories that don't really pertain to the choice of instrument, including instrument stand ($50), pad savers or swabs for the body ($25), neck ($10), and mouthpiece ($5), as well as mouthpiece patch ($5).

So, a reasonable budget for playing saxophone should include $200-300 for reeds and non-horn-specific accessories, then another $100-500 in value in saxophone-specific accessories which may or may not be included with any package.







The When comparing the relative value of playable horns, for high-end horns, the sound or feel ends up 





The upper limit of the saxophone value is after it has been overhauled. ($1500) An overhaul involves removing all the replaceable parts like pads, resonators, springs, steels, felts and corks.  Then the instrument is repaired as necessary to remove any dents, level tone holes, fit the neck, resolder  or sometimes customizating key mechanisms or placement of thumb rests, then replacing the replaceable parts when reassembling.  Then adjusted to have consistent tone and intonation.

In between not playing and full overhaul is a huge range.  New saxophones often need some small adjustments, and even playing instruments have a few things that can help  

  If the damage to a saxophone is localized, 

