Jason Yu 
12th grade 

12/9/18

Was working on classical piece in A minor
Introduced long tones with dynamics
Introduced palm key technique
Worked on articulations

Created 6 exercises for arpeggios to support piece

C major - G major
A minor - G magjor
1. one octave triads ascending - descending / descending - ascending
2. normal range triads ascending - descending / descending - ascending
3. stepwise ascending / descending
4. stepwise interchange ascending - descending / descending - ascending
5. extended range triads ascending - descending / descending - ascending

Grand arpeggio
C major - G7 
A minor - E7
6. ascending - descending / descending - ascending

Shared favorite pieces
(Never lose love for you?)
Fly Me To the Moon
()

12/16/18

Warm up on long tones exercise with dynamics (D - A - D - A - D)
Read chord exercises 1, 2, 6
review classical piece in A minor, focus on articulation and breathing
Intonation, mouthpiece technique, ligature position, reed work
Read through Fly Me To the Moon in original key (transposed for Eb: A major)

To practice: 
warm up on long tones for dynamics and intonation
5 chord exercises (all but extended range)
Fly Me To the Moon, reading the original key (C major)


12/23/18

Warmed up on long tones with dynamics, paid attention to intonation when getting loud
Played through Tonic-Dominant chord exercises.  Was at about qn=60.  
Played through Fly Me To The Moon in C, A and Eb.  Pointed out rhythm, counting through long notes.
Discussed diatonic vs relative chords and scales.
Discussed use or relative chords in Fly Me To The Moon and how to find the chord tones, how to compare adjacent chords for common tones and changing tones.


To practice:

Warm up on long tones with dynamic swell, focusing on keeping pitch steady

Aim to get to speed of mm=80 on chord exercises (C Major/A Minor)
Start chord exercises for other keys (I will send these), related to Fly Me To The Moon (in C)

Improvise with the recording, using the scale of the piece.

Go through the song and write out all the chords (start with the pitch named in the chord, then choose every other note in the scale).

Go through the song again and make note of the common tones between chords.  (Examples: 

	First two chords are A- & D-.  
	A- has A C E G, and D- has D F A C.  So, A- & D- share the notes A & C.

	Next two chords are D- & G7.
	D- has D F A C, and G7 has G B D F.  So, D- & G7 share the notes D & F.

	Next two chords are G7 and C.
	G7 has G B D F, and C has C E G (also B if we go to Cmaj7).  So, G7 and C(maj7) share the notes G (& B).

Go through the song again and write out the non-common tones.  Examples:

	First two chords are A- & D-.  
	A- has A C E G, and D- has D F A C.  So, the notes unique to A- are E & G, and the notes unique to D- are D & F.  See how these are intertwined and alternate (D, E, F & G)

	Next two chords are D- & G7.
	D- has D F A C, and G7 has G B D F.  So, the notes unique to D- are A & C, and the notes unique to G7 are G & B.  These are intertwined and alternate (G, A, B, C).

	Next two chords are G7 and C.
	G7 has G B D F, and C has C E G (also B if we go to Cmaj7).  So, the notes unique to G7 are D & F, and the notes unique to Cmaj7 are C & E.  These are intertwined and alternate (C, D, E, F).

Go through the song again and identify the rhythmic lick every 2 measures.  This is a 4-note pattern, with the first two notes from the first chords, and the seconds two notes from the second chord.  

	Write 4-note melodies for each of these patterns, choosing notes from the appropriate chords.  Try one pattern with ascending notes, one with descending notes, and one with common tones. 




I wanted to share these exercises with you.  These are based on the chord changes to Fly Me to the Moon (in C) and should help with the assignment we came up with.  

http://davidelainealt.com/lessons/pdf/fly-me-chord-exercises-in-C.pdf

These exercises include: 

1) "Root Position Chords"  Lists the notes in the chords, where the lowest pitch is the note the chord is named for.  (This is called "root position").  You might want to try figuring these out on your own, then compare it to this.   The purpose is to show what the notes are in each chord, and that most of the chords are constructed only using notes in the scale.  

2) "Inverted Chords"  Lists the notes in the chords, but inverted so the notes are in similar register, and shows the overlap--usually there are 2 notes that are common between adjacent chords, and these trade off:  2 of the notes in a chord are shared with the preceding chord, and the other 2 notes are shared with the following chord.

3) "Running changes" shows the basic arpeggio pattern in one octave, in root position, both ascending then descending.  Note how the roots are not close to each other.

4) "Common Tones" elaborates the notes that are common between adjacent chords.  In order to establish this pattern, we often start on notes that are not the root of the chord.  

5) "Ascending Arpeggios" these are similar to the previous chord exercises, designed to show the chords over much of the range of the instrument.  These start on the root of the chord, drop down to a low note, and continue upward.  

6) "Descending Arpeggios" is the downward version of #5, starting on the root in the upper register and descending through the range of the instrument.


